CHAPTER 11:
AMORTIZED ANALYSIS

In this chapter, we will analyze the running time for several of the advanced data structures that have been presented in Chapters 4 and 6. In particular, we will consider the worst-case running time for any sequence of m operations. This contrasts with the more typical analysis, in which a worst-case bound is given for any single operation. 

-Analyze the binomial queue operations

-Analyze skew heaps

-Introduce and analyze the Fibonacci heap

11.2. Binomial Queues
The first data structure we will look at is the binomial queue of Chapter 6, which we now review briefly. Recall that a binomial tree B 0 is a one-node tree, and for k > 0, the binomial tree Bk is built by melding two binomial trees B k-1 together.

11.3. Skew Heaps

The analysis of binomial queues is a fairly easy example of an amortized analysis. We now look at skew heaps. As is common with many of our examples, once the right potential function is found, the analysis is easy. The difficult part is choosing a meaningful potential function. 

11.4. Fibonacci Heaps

In Section 9.3.2, we showed how to use priority queues to improve on the naïve O(|V|2) running time of Dijkstra's shortest-path algorithm. The important observation was that the running time was dominated by|E|decrease_key operations and |V| insert and delete_min operations. These operations take place on a set of size at most |V|. By using a binary heap, all these operations take O(log |V|) time, so the resulting bound for Dijkstra's algorithm can be reduced to O(|E| log |V|).

11.4.1. Cutting Nodes in Leftist Heaps

In binary heaps, the decrease_key operation is implemented by lowering the value at a node and then percolating it up toward the root until heap order is established. In the worst case, this can take O(log n) time, which is the length of the longest path toward the root in a balanced tree. 


11.4.3. The Fibonacci Heap Operations

As we mentioned before, the Fibonacci heap combines the leftist heap decrease_key operation with the lazy binomial queue merge operation. Unfortunately, we cannot use both operations without a slight modification. The problem is that if arbitrary cuts are made in the binomial trees, the resulting forest will no longer be a collection of binomial trees. Because of this, it will no longer be true that the rank of every tree is at most log n . Since the amortized bound for delete_min in lazy binomial queues was shown to be 2 log n + r, we need r = O(log n) for the delete_min bound to hold. 


11.5. Splay Trees

As a final example, we analyze the running time of splay trees. Recall, from Chapter 4, that after an access of some item x is performed, a splaying step moves x to the root by a series of three operations: zig, zig-zag, and zig-zig. These tree rotations are shown in Figure 11.21. We
adopt the convention that if a tree rotation is being performed at node x, then prior to the rotation p is its parent and g is its grandparent (if x is not the child of the root). Recall that the time required for any tree operation on node x is proportional to the number of nodes on the path from the root to x. If we count each zig operation as one rotation and each zig-zig or zig-zag as two rotations, then the cost of any access is equal to 1 plus the number of rotations. 




























































